# Understanding U.S. Wage Gaps with Machine Learning Models

For my final project for my Machine Learning Foundations course from Cornell University, I wanted to build a series of models trained on the 1994 U.S. census dataset to predict if an individual's income was up to $50,000 or greater than it. I wanted to focus on any features related to an individual's race or sex identity to understand trends in including such information in the model's accuracy score. My goal was to see if a model could perform better if the race and sex of the individual were mentioned to understand how a model understands the salaries of women and workers of color. Hispanic and African-American men make 70% what white men make a year while women of all races made less than their male coworkers.

I built pairs of LogisticRegression models on the dataset but had each model in the pair focus on a different subset of the compelte dataset. In each pair, one model would be trained on the full feature set while the other was trained on the features excluding an individual's race and sex. Using the default regularization value and a maximum number of iterations of 1000, the model trained on the full data performed better by about 0.7%. While this is not a significant difference between the two models' performance, it is important to note that a model will predict an individual's salary more accurately if race and sex are mentioned.

After using Scikit-learn's GridSearchCV, it was determined that the default model was also the best-performing model on the full dataset while reducing the smaller feature set's regularization value optimized its model. Even after determining and building the most optimal models on both datasets, the default (or best) model on the full dataset outperformed the model on the abridged dataset by 0.5% accuracy. The models proved there is a wage gap against women and workers of color, as including data about an individual's race and sex improved its performance. While the dataset is about three decades old, this project examines how machine learning models may require being trained on some demographic information about an individual when dealing with data about human subjects.
